docs: update migration docs (#1303)
pokt-network/poktroll: docusaurus/docs/operate/morse_migration/11_testing.md

mkdir -p $HOME/morse-testnet-snapshot
# 1. Untar the snapshot file
tar -xvf <testnet-snapshot-file>.tar -C $HOME/morse-testnet-snapshot
# 2. Change directory to the extracted snapshot folder
cd $HOME/morse-testnet-snapshot
```

## 2. Export Morse TestNet Export State

Substitute the corresponding snapshot height and date to generate the Morse TestNet state export:

```bash
export TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT="<HEIGHT>" # E.g. "176681"
export TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_DATE="<DATE>" # E.g. "2025-05-07"
export MORSE_TESTNET_STATE_EXPORT_PATH="./morse_state_export_${TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT}_${TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_DATE}.json"
pocket --datadir="$HOME/morse-snapshot" util export-genesis-for-reset "$TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT" pocket > "$MORSE_TESTNET_STATE_EXPORT_PATH"
```

:::tip
Ensure that you've **also** retrieved and exported the corresponding Morse MainNet snapshot by following steps 1-2
in [State Transfer Playbook](./4_state_transfer_playbook.md).
:::

## 3. Transform & Merge Morse Exports to a Canonical Account State Import Message

Merge the Morse MainNet and TestNet state exports into a single
`msg_import_morse_acccounts_m<MAINNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT>_t<TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT>.json` file:

```bash

> export MSG_IMPORT_MORSE_ACCOUNTS_PATH="./msg_import_morse_accounts_m${SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT}_t${TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT}.json"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export MSG_IMPORT_MORSE_ACCOUNTS_PATH="./msg_import_morse_accounts_m${MAINNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT}_t${TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT}.json"
```

---
title: Migration Testing
sidebar_position: 11
---

## Table Of Contents

- [Background](#background)
- [1. Retrieve a Morse TestNet Snapshot](#1-retrieve-a-morse-testnet-snapshot)
- [2. Export Morse TestNet Export State](#2-export-morse-testnet-export-state)
- [3. Transform & Merge Morse Exports to a Canonical Account State Import Message](#3-transform--merge-morse-exports-to-a-canonical-account-state-import-message)

## Background

For testing the migration process end-to-end, _on a live and public network and with real stakeholders_, the Morse state

> is initially imported into Shannon TestNet(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must be initially imported into Shannon TestNet(s).
```
Should it be a "must be" instead?

Author: :thinking: Not sure. In my view, we're describing our operational decision, not justifying its philosophy. I.e., I think it's fine as is. :sweat_smile:

In order to maximize both developer convenience and peace of mind, the Morse states which are imported into Shannon
TestNet(s) are **a merge of both a Morse MainNet and a Morse TestNet state exports**.

## 1. Retrieve a Morse TestNet Snapshot

> Morse state exports are derived from snapshots. Since Morse TestNet snapshots are not automated, like Morse MainNet
> snapshots are, Morse TestNet snapshots are taken manually and distributed via STORJ network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Morse state exports are derived from snapshots. Since TestNet snapshots are not automated, like MainNet, TestNet snapshots are taken manually and distributed via STORJ network.
```

Feels like too much occurrences of Morse XNet snapshots.

Links are provided here for convenience:

| Snapshot                                                                                                                                                      | Height | Date       | Size   | 
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------|------------|--------|
| [morse-tesnet-176681-2025-05-07.txz](https://link.storjshare.io/raw/jwndx6se4o6tdwpeqhxm7imiam6a/pocket-network-snapshots/morse-tesnet-176681-2025-05-07.txz) | 176681 | 2025-05-07 | 7.37GB |

> In order to generate or reproduce the canonical merged Morse export state, the snapshot heights for used then
> reproducing MUST match what those used when generating the canonical state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to generate or reproduce the canonical merged Morse export state, the snapshot heights MUST match those used when generating the canonical state as per the [Migration Artifacts](...) table
```

> In order to generate or reproduce the canonical merged Morse export state, the snapshot heights for used then
> reproducing MUST match what those used when generating the canonical state.
> See the table in [Migration Artifacts](https://github.com/pokt-network/poktroll/tree/main/tools/scripts/migration) to
> ensure the correctness of snapshot heights.

Author: ```suggestion
In order to generate or reproduce the canonical merged Morse export state, the snapshot heights MUST match those used when generating the canonical state, as per the [Migration Artifacts](https://github.com/pokt-network/poktroll/tree/main/tools/scripts/migration) table.
```

Export the snapshot into a new directory on your local machine.

```bash
mkdir -p $HOME/morse-testnet-snapshot
# 1. Untar the snapshot file
tar -xvf <testnet-snapshot-file>.tar -C $HOME/morse-testnet-snapshot
# 2. Change directory to the extracted snapshot folder
cd $HOME/morse-testnet-snapshot
```

> ## 2. Export Morse TestNet Export State

Reviewer: I would rather merge this into the previous section and provide a single copy pastable code to both retrieving and exporting the state.

It would also be a good opportunity to automate the extraction of the `height` and `date` from the downloaded file.

The idea would be to endup with an export with a single copy past (if possible)

Author: This division between extracting the snapshot tarball and exporting the state from that mirrors the existing steps outlined in the [State Transfer Playbook](https://dev.poktroll.com/operate/morse_migration/state_transfer_playbook).

I think it's prudent to keep them separate, in case an error occurs in-between (e.g. out of disk space :sweat_smile:).

Author: Neat idea about trying to parse the file name, I'd rather not experiment with any more bash than is  absolutely necessary. :sweat_smile:

Substitute the corresponding snapshot height and date to generate the Morse TestNet state export:

```bash
export TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT="<HEIGHT>" # E.g. "176681"
export TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_DATE="<DATE>" # E.g. "2025-05-07"
export MORSE_TESTNET_STATE_EXPORT_PATH="./morse_state_export_${TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT}_${TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_DATE}.json"
pocket --datadir="$HOME/morse-snapshot" util export-genesis-for-reset "$TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT" pocket > "$MORSE_TESTNET_STATE_EXPORT_PATH"
```

:::tip
Ensure that you've **also** retrieved and exported the corresponding Morse MainNet snapshot by following steps 1-2
in [State Transfer Playbook](./4_state_transfer_playbook.md).
:::

## 3. Transform & Merge Morse Exports to a Canonical Account State Import Message

Merge the Morse MainNet and TestNet state exports into a single

> `msg_import_morse_acccounts_m<SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT>_t<TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT>.json` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`msg_import_morse_acccounts_m<MAINNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT>_t<TESTNET_SNAPSHOT_HEIGHT>.json` file:
```
